The Science Fiction Radio Show
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. James Gunn approaches science fiction from
many angles. He writes it, he teaches it, and he's published important
historical and critical material on science fiction. Some of Gunn's better-known
novels include The Joymakers, The Immortals, The Listeners, and The Dreamers.
The Immortals was the basis for the television show of a few years back, The
Immortal. Gunn's critical work, in addition to numerous essays, consists of two
major publications, Alternate Worlds, The 1975 History of Science Fiction, and
The Road to Science Fiction, the four-volume anthology that includes Gunn's
essays on the definition of science fiction and its historical development.
Gunn's criticism is valuable because it not only comes from someone who knows
the field, but also because Gunn is a scholar and professor at a major
university. he brings the insight of a professional academic to the field. We
talked with Gunn about how he divides himself between being both a writer and a
teacher. We asked him if he'd ever considered writing as a full-time career. I
did, as a matter of fact, write full-time for a period of a little more than
three years. A year in 1948, 1949, and I went back to school then and got a
master's degree. but i continued to write and uh then uh after i'd worked for
this paperback publisher after i got my master's degree uh worked for a
paperback publisher for a year and a half i found out that i'd sold four stories
that i hadn't known about and decided to go back to full time writing So I did
write full-time from the fall of 1942 until the late summer of 1955. And really
much of the groundwork for the later books that I published and the success that
I had, I think such as it was, was based upon that freelance period. I didn't
make a lot of money at it, below the poverty level, but my needs were fairly
simple at that time. And what it later paid off in the sense that the stories
that I wrote appeared in books, and some of them even were made in the movies
and all that sort of thing. Gunn explains how he became involved in teaching. It
was after 1955, or in the fall of 1955, after my wife and I had moved back to
Lawrence, Kansas, simply as a place to live, but I got involved almost by
accident with teaching at the university, from which I'd gotten my two degrees
at the University of Kansas, and became involved with other aspects of the
university, edited the alumni magazine for three years, and then became director
of public relations for the university for 12 years before returning to full
-time teaching and writing in 1970. Gunn always intended to write science
fiction criticism. But looking back upon it, I know, I think right from the
beginning, I had the feeling that I wanted to do criticism in the area My first
ten stories, for instance, were published under a pseudonym of Edwin James. I
began to use my own name with the eleventh story. But the reason I can remember
now for doing that was the fact that I thought I would write criticism about
science fiction, and I wanted to save my real name for that. But after ten
stories, I decided that was foolish. and I ought to use my real name for
everything. But looking back upon it, I think the academic interest was there
right from the beginning. Beginning next time, we'll talk with James Gunn about
his writing, both the stories and the criticism.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show. a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. James Gunn, author, critic, and teacher of
science fiction, has written some valuable books on the definition and
historical development of science fiction. He's examining some big questions in
this work. Things like what is science fiction? What makes it different from
other literature? And where it comes from? And since Gunn is a professor at the
University of Kansas, besides being a long-time author of science fiction, he
combines a scholar's objectivity and a creator's understanding in answering
these questions. alternate worlds published in 1976 is his first major critical
work gunn explains its origin i had uh when i first went back to full-time
teaching had been asked if i would teach a science fiction course which is
different from the experience at most universities where uh there is some
resistance to the notion of doing that and i accepted because i had the feeling
that there wasn't a good history of science fiction and that this course would
give me the incentive to write it. So I sat down and wrote very fast and ended
up with 13 chapters representing about 13 lectures for the 14-week semester.
and these chapters or these lectures became the 13 chapters in a book of mine
which appeared in about I guess 75 after some delays as Alternate Worlds, the
Illustrated History of Science Fiction but as it won consequence of its
publication I got a call one day from an editor at New American Library who was
admiring it, and asked me if I'd like to do a book for them. And I knew also
that I really felt the need for anthologies which covered more than the brief
span of the 20s to the 60s, which most anthologies did, and there really wasn't
much in the 20s or 30s, most of it covered the period of the 40s and 50s. So I
said yes, and I sent them a proposal for the first volume of the rote science
fiction. At that time, all we knew that there would be would be one volume which
covered a period from the earliest prehistory of literature, not to mention
science fiction. up to 1900 and the H.G. Wells Early Stories and Novels. The
volume used a unique and valuable approach to science fiction criticism. It was
an anthology of stories. But each story was accompanied by an essay which
covered the story's importance and also discussed the period of science fiction
history to which it belonged. Gunn explains how that volume led to others. By
the time I got finished with the manuscript, I had felt that it really, unlike
most books, came out even better than I thought it was going to, and I proposed
that we go ahead with a second and third volume. They said, let's wait and see
how this does. And eventually, after it had done better than they thought, they
agreed that I could go on to volume two and three. uh, which, uh, covered the
period, uh, from, uh, 1900 to approximately 1940, and then from 1940 to 1970 or
70, actually, the latest one, 76, I think. Gunn has recently published a fourth
volume in the series and says that it's now finished. The title for the entire
series is The Road to Science Fiction, and it stands as a major work of science
fiction criticism. We'll talk some more about it with James Gunn next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. James Gunn is noted not only as an author
of science fiction, but as a critic of the field and as a chronicler in the
story of its development. Gunn has recently completed the last volume in his
four-volume series, The Road to Science Fiction. In this unique work, he traces
the development of science fiction from the very beginning of recorded
literature until the present day. What's different and valuable about Gunn's
approach in the road to science fiction is that he uses the actual literature
itself, from tales belonging to the ancient world and modern short stories. But
each literary selection is accompanied by an essay which discusses the work's
importance and deals with the historical period to which it belongs. When using
the volumes then, a reader not only is getting some good science fiction, but
he's picking up an education relating to the definition and development of
science fiction. Except for the last one, Each volume is also organized around a
particular thesis or point. The first one, for instance, develops the idea that
before real science fiction could exist, mankind had to recognize the concept of
change. It seems to me that the essential nature of science fiction is that it
deals with change. In fact, in order for us to recognize a story or a novel as
being science fiction, We have to identify that part of it which is different
from here and now, our everyday world. And so it deals with how people would
react in changed circumstances.
So up to approximately the time of the Investor Revolution, the very concept of
change itself was alien to human minds. It seems to me, looking back over the
history of humanity, that mostly people saw change as being only the eternal
circle of the seasons changing from spring to summer to fall to winter and back
again. And it wasn't until the Investor Revolution and, of course, the
scientific perceptions that preceded it and accompanied it, which began to
create change that people saw could be beneficial over which they might be able
to exercise some control. That is, it was man-made change created by human
desires and intelligence, and it could be controlled by humanity's exercise of
intelligence. And it seems to me that science fiction was the literary response
to that recognition. The next two volumes develop other ideas that Gunn believes
are essential to the development of science fiction. The notion, for instance,
that mankind is a species rather than isolated tribes or nations or races. But
the last volume is a bit different. This is because it deals with the most
recent science fiction stories, and it's more difficult to tell which ones will
be important. In the more current story, this is much more difficult to
determine. You can't really say what stories are important until much after
they've been published, and you can't certainly say which are typical until you
decide what the period really stands for. So what I did in the fourth volume was
to select stories that I thought dealt with the literary uses of science
fiction. And so the volume is primarily concerned not with questions of generic
importance, but the question of literary uses. Gunn has performed a valuable
service to the field with the four volumes in his The Road to Science Fiction
series. By defining science fiction, by demonstrating what makes it different
from other types of literature, and by revealing its origins, he's made science
fiction more understandable and more respectable. Next time, we'll talk with
Gunn about his own fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio
Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. In much of his science fiction, James Gunn
examines the question of what makes man happy. He extrapolates a future which
seems plausible from current social conditions and asked the standard science
fiction question, What If? In his 1963 novel, The Joymakers, he fills out the
question by asking what if man discovered a drug that would make him perfectly
happy, even though it would remove him from the real world. Gunn answers the
question by saying that man would probably accept the opportunity. And then he
shows what would happen to man and society as a result. Ultimately, as it worked
out in the novel, it turned out that the people who wanted happiness to get what
they want,
since what one can get in the external world is limited by the number of people
and the number of people who want this particular thing. Ultimately, they get
what they want by being fed illusions that they get what they want. And
ultimately, everybody ends up floating in amniotic cells living on dreams of
success and accomplishment fed by a machine, which eventually works out to be
that you're happy when you don't want anything anymore. And it occurred to me
that that is the same as death, and ultimately the equation for that is that
happiness equals death, and that life is still wanting something. One of Gunn's
more recent books, The Dreamers, also published in paperback as The Mind Master,
also presents a society in which man has presumably achieved perfect happiness.
And he does so through chemical memory. Any possible experience can be felt by
an individual if he is injected with the DNA or RNA of someone who has actually
undergone that experience. It is a comment on the fact that that dreaming itself
is a non-survival characteristic. It may be the most satisfying, ultimately the
most satisfying experience, but as perhaps I said in The Joymakers, is perhaps
repeated here in a different way, that ultimate satisfaction or dreaming is a
death activity, and that survival
demands something less than total satisfaction. Both The Joymakers and The
Dreamers, along with many of Gunn's other books, consist of a series of related
novellas rather than being a straightforward novel. Gunn says that he started
this practice years ago, not long after he began writing science fiction, for a
couple of reasons. It allowed him to be paid twice, since he could publish each
novella separately in a magazine before putting it with other novellas to make
up a whole novel. And as a consequence, I have since that time mostly written my
novels in the form of publishable
fragments or individual stories. And in a way, I think it's worked rather well
because in The Joymakers, I was able to use as a framework, as a subject matter,
really an idea rather than a person or a group of people. And so this novel,
which extended over about 200 years, picked up several different people, but
basically was about one thing, The Science of Happiness. and similarly The
Immortals, which also continued for about 200 years, and The Listeners, which
covered about 150 years. And all
of these seem to me to focus on an idea, which is what science fiction mostly
does. We'll continue with the work of James Gunn next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. The science fiction of James Gunn is based
on strong, clear ideas that are developed in stories with a good deal of action
in them. One of his better-known books, a 1962 novel entitled The Immortals, is
based on a classic science fiction premise. What if immortality were possible?
What would it do to society and to human nature? The novel focuses on Marshall
Cartwright, who is immortal, and the search for him by Leroy Weaver, a dying
millionaire who wants Cartwright's blood so that he himself can be immortal. But
the novel is more than a chase or a search. Certainly, the notion of the search
for the immortal, the person that I call Cartwright, Marshall Cartwright, was in
there to provide a core of interest. But I was primarily interested in the novel
on the impact of the possibility of immortality on society itself and interested
in dealing with those kinds of impulses that people have relating to immortality
and longevity. By examining people's reactions to immortality, Gunn hopes to
make a point about human nature. And in a certain sense, The Immortals embodies,
as well as anything else that I've written, my basic philosophical position in
my work that can be traced through almost all of it, I suspect, that there are
no real villains in life. There are only people who want the same things
everybody else wants, but who are willing to do to get them things that other
people are not willing to do. and that the best things in life can be wanted too
much. That if anything that is considered good can be an evil, and I suppose one
of the basic concepts with which I began, The Immortals, was the concept that
everybody thinks it would be wonderful to live forever, but what if you had a
man who accidentally could live forever but who also, whose blood could
rejuvenate other people and his life would be made miserable and from there, of
course, the entire extrapolation about the ways in which society, knowing the
possibility of immortality, would force people, would force society to pour more
and more and more money into medicine until the law of diminishing returns would
mean that half of the world would be devoted to medicine and everybody else
would be starving in the slums. Gunn does indeed show the negative effects of
immortality. He suggests that his pursuit would cause great social inequality,
cause medical costs to rise drastically. It would also create a society so
obsessed with seeking to live forever that it would forget to live for now. In
1969, there was a television series based on the Immortals. We asked Gunn what
he thought of it. Oh, I thought it was a total disaster. And that's not
uncommon, of course. but the resemblances between the novel and the book are
very slight. My book starts with the immortal being a drifter who comes in and
sells a pint of blood and then disappears for the rest of the novel until the
very end. And the television series is all about the immortal and his being
pursued, and eventually it turns into simply another search for the papers.
Another fugitive. Somebody is being chased, but it makes no real difference why
he's being chased.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.